---
layout: post
title:  "Going Anywhere - Autojump Deep Dive"
date:   2017-04-20 19:59:03 -0800
---

autojump is an open source tool I loved very much. It is simple and intuitive. It memorizes the directories you have visited before, and quickly jump to the destination with just a couple of finger clicks. For installation instructions, the [README](https://github.com/wting/autojump). For example, if you have previously visited a deeply nested directory /usr/abc/def/g/h/i/jkl/ using

```shell
cd /usr/abc/def/g/h/i/jkl/
```

Then, you can quickly jump to the directory using the command

```shell
j jkl
```

Sounds like Magic? There is a caveat though - **Directories must be visited before they can be jumped to**. What happens is, every time you change the directory by calling 'cd path'. autojump would record the change to the Stat file. When you want to jump to a directory, it evaluates the directory against the existing directories in Stat file, and find the directories you are likely to visit.

autojump supports multiple shells, including bash, zsh, fish and zcsh. In this post we will only discuss its bash support. I am using Ubuntu 16.04 OS.
To understand autojump, I will cover the following:

1. Command alias.
2. autojump core data structure - Stat file
3. How "cd" command updates the Stat file.
4. How autojump chooses the go-to paths.
5. Path autocomplete feature.

## Command Alias
Let's start with the commands autojump provides. In total, there are four user-facing commands - *j*, *jo*, *jc* and *jco*.

1. j foo: jump to a directory that contains foo.
2. jo foo: Open the file manager for directory foo.
3. jc bar: Similar to the "j" command, but restrict the destination to a child directory of the current location.
4. jco bar: Similar to "jo" command, but restrict the destination to a child directory of the current location.

They are essentially simple shell functions defined in *autojump.bash*. Take the *j* command as an example:

```shell
# In /usr/share/autojump/autojump.bash
j() {
    # Skip error handling code for simplicity.
    output="$(autojump ${@})"
    if [[ -d "${output}" ]]; then
        echo -e "\\033[31m${output}\\033[0m"
        cd "${output}"
    fi
}
```

The *j* command takes the string parameter (or a list of strings) and in turn triggers autojump command. autojump then returns the matched path and change the directory to that path.

## The Core Data Structure - Stat File
In autojump, Stat file is a key concept. It ranks the directories based on visiting frequency, and jumps to the path with the highest frequency.
The curious minds might wonder where autojump stores the previously visited directories. In fact, autojump provides an introspection mechnism by calling "j --stat". This command displays the content of the Stat file, as well as the Stat file location. Here is a sample output for "j --stat":

```text
# Weight  Directories
10.0:   /usr/share/autojump
14.0:   /home
20.0:   /home/user_name/Documents
20.0:   /home/user_name/github
22.0:   /home/user_name/Downloads

96:     total weight
5:  number of entries

data:    /home/user_name/.local/share/autojump/autojump.txt
```

As you can see, the *data* entry is the location of the Stat file. Each directory in the file is assigned a weight. The higher the weight, the more likely the directory is chosen. Again, note that **only directory in Stat files can be reached by autojump!**

## How 'cd' Command Triggers Stat File Update?
As a follow-up question, you may wonder how a system "cd" command triggers the Stat file update. The magic lies inside autojump.bash file:

```shell
# In /usr/share/autojump/autojump.bash
case $PROMPT_COMMAND in
    *autojump*)
        ;;
    *)
        PROMPT_COMMAND=\"${PROMPT_COMMAND:+$(echo "${PROMPT_COMMAND}\" | awk \'{gsub(/; *$/,\"\")}1\') ; }autojump_add_to_database\"
        ;;
esac
```

Basically, it utilizes the environment variable *PROMPT_COMMAND*. Elements in PROMPT_COMMAND are called every time before Bash displays the prompt message. autojump_add_to_database, the shell command defined in autojump.bash, would simply call "autojump --add" for adding path and updating weights in the Stat file. The "--add" condition would trigger the add_path method:

```Python
# In /usr/share/autojump/autojump
def add_path(data, path, weight=10):
    """
    Add a new path or increment an existing one.
    os.path.realpath() is not used because it's preferable to use symlinks
    with resulting duplicate entries in the database than a single canonical
    path.
    """
    path = unico(path).rstrip(os.sep)
    if path == os.path.expanduser('~'):
        return data, Entry(path, 0)

    # Weight is sqrt(sum_of_all_weight_squares)
    data[path] = sqrt((data.get(path, 0) ** 2) + (weight ** 2))

    return data, Entry(path, data[path])
```

add_path returns the data, which is a map of (directory, weight). The more you use a path, the higher the weight, and the more likely autojump will choose it as the default destination.

## How Autojump Finds Paths
Now let's move to autojump's path selection logic. The question is, given the list of managed paths in Stat file, how can we rank the directories based on frequency? It turned out the logic is fairly straightforward. 

```Python
# In /usr/share/autojump/autojump
# entries is a list of named tuple, containing path and weight attribute,
# while needles is the user input strings for matching.
imap(attrgetter('path'), find_matches(entries, needles))
```

autojump calls *find_matches* to first sort directories by weight, and then matches the user-provided input against the sorted directories using different matching algorithms (consecutive, fuzzy and anywhere). The algorithm names are pretty descriptive and I will skip the detailed implementation. Here is the code:

```Python
# In /usr/share/autojump/autojump

# Removed the utility method such as path_exists and is_cwd for simplicity.
# Returns: A iterator of (Directory, Weight) named tuples.
def find_matches(entries, needles, check_entries=True):
    """Return an iterator to matching entries."""
    # Sort by path weight first.
    data = sorted(
        entries,
        key=attrgetter('weight'),
        reverse=True)

    return ifilter(
        lambda entry: not is_cwd(entry) and path_exists(entry),
        chain(
            # Use different match method to get the matching path.
            match_consecutive(needles, data, ignore_case),
            match_fuzzy(needles, data, ignore_case),
            match_anywhere(needles, data, ignore_case)))
```

## Path Autocomplete
autojump also implemented its own bash completion. It is achieved via [Bash programmable completion](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Programmable-Completion.html).

```Shell
# enable tab completion
_autojump() {
    local cur
    cur=${COMP_WORDS[*]:1}
    # $cur is the user input.
    comps=$(autojump --complete $cur)

    # Shows the messages returned by autojump --complete $cur in Bash.
    while read i; do
        COMPREPLY=("${COMPREPLY[@]}" "${i}")
    done <<EOF
    $comps
EOF
}
complete -F _autojump j
```

Here, "complete -F _autojump j" means when tab to complete a *j* command, the Bash would use customized *_autojump* method to complete this command.

"autojump --complete" command will in turn calls handle_tab_completion method.
handle_tab_completion would internally call find_matches method to get at most 9 matches, and send it to COMPREPLY environment variable for autocompletion. The code is:

```Python
# In /usr/share/autojump/autojump
# Only keep the major logic for simplicity.
def handle_tab_completion(needle, entries):
    # Print out at most 9 matched paths. print_tab_menu send the paths to
    # stdout, which is later captured by COMPREPLY variable for autocompletion.
    print_tab_menu(
        needle,
        take(9, find_matches(
            entries,
            [needle],
            check_entries=False)),
        '__')
```

## Autocomplete Duplicates
As of release-v22.5.1, autojump gives duplicates during autocomplete.
As an example, if we want to jump to *autojump* source directory, we would first type

```Shell
j auto
```

and then type TAB for autocomplete, the Bash would show the following:

```
auto__1__/usr/share/autojump
auto__2__/usr/share/autojump
auto__3__/usr/share/autojump
```

The same path appears three times! This is because autocomplete triggers find_matches method, which calls three different matching algorithms:

```Python
...
chain(
    # Use different match method to get the matching path.
    match_consecutive(needles, data, ignore_case),
    match_fuzzy(needles, data, ignore_case),
    match_anywhere(needles, data, ignore_case)))
```

The different match algorithms can yield same directory, thus the duplicates.

## Summary
autojump is a powerful productivity tool. It also demonstrates how to 
write a utility supporting different shells.
