Recently I read the book *Pomodoro Technique Illustrated: The Easy Way to Do More in Less Time*. This book provided practical tips for boosting the productivity and avoiding being distracted by unimportant stuff.

**Pomodoro Technique** was popularized by Francesco Cirillo, and I have heard of it many times. However, I never applied it in my daily work. Recently, I feel constantly distracted and could not find time for the most important things. Fortunately, reading this book helps me a lot and now Pomodoro principle helps me achieve more things than before!

To reiterate, Pomodoro technique is a divides your time into small slots, say 25 minutes per unit. You are asked to focus on *one and only one* thing in each unit. After you finish each unit, you can take a short rest, and start another Pomodoro unit. The book *Pomodoro Technique Illustrated* provides many tips to help execute the Pomodoro principle well. For example, it shows you how to stay committed for your daily TODO list, the importance to get usage feedbacks quickly and act on it, how to procrastinate on certain interrupts such as emails and slack messages. The most important learning for me is we have to stay committed to your task, and constantly improve the process based on your activity logs.

For me, I bought an app called *Be focused*. It reminds you the Pomodoro unit completion with a timer. I was also surprised how much focused time I really had each day. For the first few days, I could only complete 1 unit! Then, I tuned my daily schedule a bit, and now I can complete two units in the morning even before I head to office. I also change the default unit time from 25 minutes to 35 minutes, as for many of the coding work requires longer attention on the problems. In a working environment that has constant interruptions from multiple sources, Pomodoro technique really helps me a lot.